This is Sunday
morning, May 7, a bright, clear day.
And I'm heading toward Kerrville for an interview
with Porter Garner, Jr., who for many years
operated the Cadillac bar in Laredo. He is now
retired and I'm going to interview him this
afternoon and then go to a meeting of the Schreiner
College Board of Directors tomorrow in
Kerrville.
This is an effort to try to begin to record some of my
memories Of service here at Texas A&M.
Which began in the fall of 1959. My
parents. We're both. What they identified as
quote farm kids.
From near Garland. Texas.
When they were born, dad in 1909 and mother in 1910,
that was a little farming community about 20 miles
northeast of Dallas. And the money crop for
everyone was cotton.
They were both from what they identified as
hard working farm families. They
married in 1930 and I was born then a year later in
1931.
Dad became a construction carpenter when the war
started.
He got a job with the construction crew that
created Shepherd Air Force Base up in Wichita
Falls, S-H-E-P-P-A-R-D.
And we moved up there in June of 1941. We
were there until about Halloween and then
went to Fort Smith, Arkansas, where he had the same
task at what we called Camp Chaffee,
C-H-A-F-F-E-E, an army base.
After a lot of flooding and what we thought was cold
weather, he heard about better pay down at
shipyard in Orange, Texas, the extreme
southeastern corner of the state. We headed down
there,
and he was hired as a shipwright,
S-H-I-P-W-R-I-G-H-T,
which we soon learned meant someone who did
woodwork in relation to
ships.
The pay there was $1.12 and a half cents an hour. And
since he had been making 25 cents an hour on
construction in the Garland area less than two
years earlier, we thought that gold had been
discovered.
We lived first in a little
two-room apartment out toward
what we called the Port Arthur Bridge, a very high
rainbow-shaped structure across the Natchez
River, N-A-C-H-E-S,
until near the end of the spring semester.
I was a sixth grader and had entered a
four-teacher, eight-grade school in January
1942, the day the school district changed from the
Prairie View Common School District to the Bridge
City Independent District.
Late that spring,
mother and dad bought a 29-foot house trailer and
were able to park it in the backyard of a nice
family, A.C. Griffith, Abby, and Freda,
F-R-E-D-A-B-B-E-Y,
F-R-E-D-A, Abby and Freda Griffith, at 15, uh-uh.
the southeast corner of Green and Main Street of
16th
and Main Street in Orange.
I finished the year at Bridge City. And then early
that summer, mother came back from the wash
interior one day saying that she had learned that
there was a rich man in Orange named Lutcher Stark
who
paid for almost all of the expenses of the high
school boys band, the Bengal Lancers. and the
girls drum and bugle corps, the Bengal Guards. He
bought the instruments, the music, the uniforms,
paid the travel expenses, and even underwrote
salary for the band director, a man named Frank
W.R. Hubert. In order to be in the band, you had to
get permission of Mr. Huber. So mother took me over
to visit with him very soon. And he quickly asked
what instrument I wanted to play. I told him
trumpet because I was a fan of Harry James, who'd
grown up not far west in Beaumont, not far west of
Orange. He quickly asked to see. For me to. Show him
that gap in my upper teeth. Smiled and said. That
trumpet would not work, but I needed to be a
clarinet player. So I began practicing then. And
as school started that fall, I got to March with.
The Bengal anchors. which other than me
was made up of some really fine musicians and we
became a really good marching group.
We lived in that trailer
where there were couches at each end that unfolded
into
double width It
had a sink and an electric refrigerator, but we
went into the back porch of the Griffiths' house
for restroom and bathing facilities. Orange was
in the midst of going from 7,000 to about 40,000
population in 18 months because of the boom of
three shipyards. Dad was working at a
consolidated shipyard,
a big operation, which built destroyers, for
instance, DDs, destroyer escorts, for instance,
DEs, and landing craft infantry, LCIs.
The classes at the high school building, a
structure designed for four grades and 500
students.
But Having to accommodate six grades and almost
3,000 students were really hectic. There were
classes in the hallway and the school cafeteria
and everyone had to stand in line to go to the
restroom. Yet we had some splendid teachers and
everything seemed orderly. In hindsight, it is
astonishing how crime-free that boomtown was as
we listened at the news from Europe and the Pacific
in what seemed to us to be some very tough years,
some very tough months.
After perhaps two years in the trailer house, we
were able to move to
the Riverside Edition, a newly created
government housing project
northeast of the older part of Orange, which was
created out of a swamp.
The
construction of Riverside had come about when
engineers went in and cut down the cypress trees in
the swamp, quickly pumped sand out of the Sabine
River, and then put prefab housing on that
location to accommodate perhaps 10,000
residents.
It was big enough that there were three elementary
schools just to serve Riverside.
By the fall of 1943, the new high school for Urange
had opened
just east of what had been the old high school. The
new high school named in honor of Mr. Stark, Stark
High School. with Tigers as the traditional
mascot name and orange and black the school
colors. The old high school building became Helen
Carr Junior High in honor of the longtime high
school principal.
But still, the Bengal Guards and Lancers included
students from both institutions.
During those years, we had quickly joined the
First Presbyterian Church there and once more
encountered the generosity of the Stark family.
H.J. Lutcher Stark's mother, had financed the
construction of the splendid
pink granite building for the First Presbyterian
Church down at 8th and Green Avenue.
It was built in the first decade of the century at a
very high cost for that era. and included some
prize winning windows, stained glass windows
that she had bought at the Chicago World's Fair.
Even at church, some of us played in a little band
and we learned that Mr. Stark's idea for the Bengal
Guards and Lancers had started with the band that a
little musical organization that he had helped
underwrite in the mid-1930s.
The Reverend E.T. Drake was the longtime minister
at the church. Having started his ministry there
as a student, a palestine student at the Austin
Presbyterian Seminary. It was the only
congregation he ever served and he did so with
great dignity. Another distinction of that
building is that it was the first air-conditioned
building west of the Mississippi and perhaps the
first in the world. The Stark family, once more,
the Stark family had
underwritten the construction of an ice making
plant in a building just north of the church
sanctuary. Then fans blew air over the blocks of
ice through a duct system into the church
building.
Life in that boomtown
was hectic,
was calm, but always in high gear. The shipyard
went
for many months, worked three shifts,
and included a lot of overtime.
The launchings of the destroyers in particular
were major times of major celebration.
And we proudly listened to victory on the radio
from the
European and Pacific theaters. Particularly, I
remember D-Day, June 6, 1944. We were driving up to
Garland to visit family. I kept the radio on almost
all the trip in the car.
And then my grandmother Jackson, mother's
mother, my maternal grandmother Jackson,
allowed me to sleep on a pallet in the living room of
her farmhouse, and put the radio right down by my
pallet, and I listened about almost all night to
reports of the victory the Americans were
attaining.
Back at school, as I moved forward into grades, I
became active in a number of organizations,
In hindsight,
it is clear that one of the key teachers that
blessed me was Myrta Mae Force, M-Y-R-T-A, M-A-E,
two words, Myrta Mae Force,
a first-year teacher that all of us thought was
strikingly beautiful, who had just graduated
from LSU. She organized a group of us into what she
called a debating club.
And we quite often gathered on Saturdays to go
picnic
and to learn more about public speaking and
debating.
In retrospect, it is clear that what she was really
doing was giving a few of us, perhaps a dozen,
encouragement in public speaking
and organization of our thoughts.
She helped this country boy, this small town boy,
to believe that he had capability.
She also was a ceaseless encourager
of hard work and high grades.
That paragraph, that encouragement put her back
in the category of two other teachers who had
already been very important in my development.
The first of these was Miss Faye Strange, third
grade
instructor in Garland, with prematurely white
hair, Because she had prematurely white hair, we
students thought that she must have been very
aged.
In hindsight,
it is now clear that she was in her 30s,
but she took this
this hesitant
country boy who
had never,
who had not been aware of any encouragement from
anyone other than family before Miss Strange
became his teacher.
She gave me hope that I could do well, and my grades
improved
sharply. And she made a lifelong impression
on my effort.
I will always be grateful that I had the
opportunity at my parents 50th wedding
anniversary to thank her in person
for her contribution at that celebration.
And then not long before her death
in early in the year 2000.
I wrote her
in
an effort to put on paper my heartfelt feelings.
Paragraph a second teacher who was important in
The development of intellectual confidence and
talent was fourth-grader Mrs. Grace Glaze,
G-L-E-Z-E. Her husband was then the high school
principal in Garland, and Mrs. Glaze had an
unceasing determination to encourage everyone
to do their best. One of her favorite techniques
was a series of competitions. Spelling bee,
writing, essays, themes, mathematics, travel.
In hindsight, it seems that she was trying to do
everything she could to give every student an
opportunity to be a winner. I particularly
remember that with the youngster named Jesse
Cathy, C-A-T-H-E-Y. Jesse's family was truly and
pitifully poor.
Apparently, his clothes were not washed very
often, nor did he bathe regularly.
He lacked polish and confidence, but the one thing
he could do well
was to write letters. That was his handwriting. It
was very, very
attractive. almost as if he had had penmanship
classes. And so our writing contest quite often
resulted in Jesse being the winner.
And there was his moment of glory. For me, the great
victory of that year in Mrs. Glaze's class was when
the year's spelling bee ended, I was at the head of
the line. When you missed a day and your turn came,
you then moved to the foot of the line when you
returned. I had been at the head of the line but then
my parents and I took our first vacation ever to go
to visit some of mother's relatives in Tennessee
during the Easter break in 1941.
The only days Only days of construction I missed,
the first four years of school, except when I had
the chicken pox soon after Christmas in the second
grade.
But anyway, but still, when I came back, was able to
work to the head of the line, and when the year was
over, I was first in place, and that gave me as a
trophy, for being the, quote, champion speller. A
scrapbook filled with letters to Uncle Wiggly, to
Uncle, or was it Uncle Ben,
who wrote a column in the Weekly Reader, a
publication aimed at elementary schools
nationally.
But back to Orange.
Even
in junior high, I began to take courses that might
lead me toward college.
Never could I remember
feeling that I would have any choice but to go to
college. Although neither parent had finished
high school, Dad dropping out in the 9th grade.
To to take a job quote on the square in Garland.
That employment with Cole and Davis, COLE and
Davis. The primary. Quote quote dry goods store.
Quote in Garland ended during the Depression.
When they had to lay off everyone except family.
Mother had dropped out. Had mother had had to drop
out of school. Early in the 11th grade. Because of
her mother's arthritis.
Her mother's rheumatism and she had to help take
care of her. And. As the middle child of 11
children, mother then had to accept a number of
almost parental responsibilities.
Because of those experiences, they always spoke
to me with the phrase, quote, when you go to
college, period, quote. I did not feel I had a
choice
and did not question, but that their
determination for me was a blessing.
Back in high school, I gradually became a member of
a small group that took all of the courses leading
toward college. although we didn't know the
phrase, quote, college prep then.
That meant taking two years of algebra, beginning
algebra in the ninth grade, and completing the
four years of math with what we called solid plane
geometry, solid geometry, and trigonometry.
two years of Latin plus a year of Spanish,
biology, physics, and chemistry.
During my last years, I tried to play football and
run track,
ending up as the quarterback of a truly
undistinguished team. We won one game beating
Galveston
Ball High Golden Tornadoes.
An unforgettable game because
Billy Hempel, H-E-M-P-E-L, a linebacker for the
Tornadoes in attempting to tackle our fullback,